F-1 Visa for International Students: Requirements, Rules, Status
Last updated on February 23, 2024
Get ready to study abroad in America with our step-by-step guide to F-1 visa rules.

Students wishing to study in the United States need to learn about the F-1 student visa application process. There are more than one million international students currently studying abroad in the USA, and with some preparation and guidance, you can join them. To help you get started, we have put together this step-by-step guide to US visas to help you understand what is a F-1 visa, F-1 visa rules, and F-1 visa requirements.


What Is a F-1 Visa?
The F-1 student visa is a non-immigrant visa that allows international students to enter the US and study at institutions certified by the Student and Exchange Visitor Program (SEVP). It is the most popular type of student visa for students seeking to study at a US university or college, and you can only apply for your F-1 visa after an accredited US institution accepts your application.

As a F-1 student, the duration of your stay will vary based on the program in which you enroll. The I-20 form provided by the university you wish to attend will list the expiration date of your program. You will need to earn your degree before the listed expiration date, and this will give you an outline of how long you will be able to remain in the US.
Following your graduation, you may be eligible to apply for Optional Practical Training (OPT). This will permit you to work for up to 12 months in the US in a field related to your study. For STEM graduates, you can request two additional years of work in a related field. If you do not have any extensions or additional training, you will need to return to your home country within 60 days after your graduation.

F-1 Visa Requirements 
There are several F-1 visa rules to keep in mind if you plan to apply for a F-1 student visa. You must meet these requirements for your application to be accepted:
1. Institution certification—The college or the university where you plan to study needs to be approved by SEVP Immigration & Customs Enforcement.
2. Full-time enrollment—You must be enrolled as a full-time student at the institution while your academic term is in session.
3. English language proficiency—You must meet the required English language proficiency score of the institution you are attending or be enrolled in courses that will help you 			improve your English proficiency.
4. Sufficient funding—You must prove you have sufficient funds available to finance your studies and living expenses while in the US.
5. Valid passport—Your passport should be valid for US travel for at least six months after your program completion date.
6. Home country residency—You are required to have a residence in your home country to return to following the completion of your degree.




How to Apply for a F-1 Visa
Before you begin your F-1 visa application, you must take the following steps:
1. Get accepted by a SEVP-certified institution before submitting your visa application. When you are accepted, you will receive your I-20 form, which you will need to apply for your F-1 visa.
		1. Pay your SEVIS fee.
		2. Complete your DS-160 visa application.
		3. Schedule your visa interview.
		4. Attend your visa interview.
Once these steps are completed, you will be ready to complete and submit your F-1 student visa application.

F-1 Visa Application Process

1. Get Accepted and Get Your I-20
The F-1 student visa process starts when you get accepted to a SEVP-certified US university. SEVP certification is the US government’s way of proving that your university is accredited and has the proper resources to provide you with an education. 
Once you are accepted, your university will provide your I-20 form. This form documents your study plans and provides supporting information about your stay. 
The following information is recorded in the Student and Exchange Visitor Information System (SEVIS) when your I-20 is issued:
		1. Your SEVIS ID number
		2. Your program start and end dates
		3. Your intended program of study
		4. Your funding sources
		5. Cost of attendance at your school of choice
		6. Other personal information
Your university provides this information based off what you submit in your university application materials. 
As soon as you receive your I-20, make sure all your information is accurate, and then sign the bottom of the first page. It can take a long time to fix an error on your I-20 and if something is wrong, you may not be granted access into the country. Retain your form I-20 when you travel to the US. You will need it to enter the US, to work, and for other activities (e.g., like getting a US driver’s license). 
Helpful resources: Confirm your US university is a SEVP-accredited institution 
US VISAS TIP


2. Pay Your SEVIS Fee
The total cost for your F-1 student visa will be approximately $510, which includes the cost of the visa itself, plus SEVIS processing and maintenance fees. 
1. Requirements: Your I-20
2. Cost: $350 
3. Where to apply: Payment portal for your SEVIS fee
Make sure to save the I-901 SEVIS fee receipt. You will need it for your visa interview. 


3. Complete Your DS-160 Visa Application
Your DS-160 is your visa application. All prospective international students must complete a DS-160 to receive an F-1 visa. 
1. Requirements: Your I-20, passport, travel itinerary, photo for your visa
2. Cost: $160 
3. Where to apply: Application portal for your DS-160
After you successfully submit your DS-160, you will receive a printed confirmation with a barcode on it. Save this form – you will need it for your visa interview. 


4. Schedule Your Visa Interview
Find the nearest US embassy or consulate and schedule your visa interview. Wait times will vary by country and can take months — so remember to set up your appointments as early as possible!
Practicing your visa interview in advance will make you feel more comfortable with the process.
US VISAS TIP


5. Attend Your Visa Interview
During the interview portion of the F-1 visa application process, the US consulate or embassy confirms you are coming to study as a legitimate, serious student. In your visa interview, you must also prove you have the funds to cover your time studying in the US, and confirm that you plan on returning home after your studies are complete. Attending your visa interview in person is required, though there are a few rare exceptions (e.g., if you are younger than 14 or older than 80 years of age, or if you meet certain visa renewal requirements). 
Cost: Your DS-160 payment covers the cost
Where to apply: Scheduling portal for your visa interview
After you successfully complete your visa interview, you will be granted your F-1 visa and acquire F-1 status. You are now cleared to study in the USA! 
Refer to Travel.state.gov to learn more. 
F-1 Visa Admission Requirements
Before you attend your visa interview, make sure to have the following documents ready for evaluation by the consular officer:
1. A valid passport
2. A copy of the photo you will use for your visa
3. Printed copies of your DS-160 and I-901 SEVIS payment confirmations
4. I-20 form
5. School transcript and official test scores cited on your university application
6. Diploma (if applicable)
7. Bank statements or other proof of finances
During your interview, the consular officer may request additional documents. To prepare, consider bringing the following documents:
1. Academic records such as transcripts, diplomas, degrees, or certificates from schools you attended
2. Standardized test scores required by your US institution
3. Evidence of your intent to depart the United States upon completion of your course of study
4. Statements proving your ability to pay all educational, living, and travel costs
F-1 Visa Interview  
As an international student, you might feel uncertain about your upcoming interview. While feeling nervous is normal, do not forget to take a deep breath and remember that you are well prepared! Your interview is important, but should not be stressful.
WHAT TO EXPECT AT YOUR VISA INTERVIEW
Your interviewer will ask questions to determine: 
1. Are you a legitimate student?
2. Do you have the resources to pay for your studies?
3. Do you plan to return home after completing your degree?
To prepare for your F-1 student visa interview, here are some questions you might be asked: 
1. Why did you pick this university?
2. Which other US universities did you apply to?
3. How will you pay for your education?
4. Do you have relatives in the USA?
5. Do you plan to work while in the USA?
6. What do you plan to do after graduation?

F-1 Visa Denials
There is a possibility that your F-1 visa application will be denied. If this happens, you will be given detailed reasoning in writing, including the section of the law that led to the denial of your application.  
To avoid having your F-1 student visa application denied, it is important to read and follow all instructions carefully. Always double- and triple-check your documents before submitting your application. 

Remember: During your F-1 student visa interview, you want to sufficiently demonstrate that you are traveling to the US to study and planning to return to your home country once your program is complete. Keep this in mind as you answer your interview questions.
Maintaining F-1 Visa Status
As an international student, you must actively maintain your F-1 status to continue studying in the US. To do this, you must comply with both university regulations and codes of conduct, as well as with the requirements and conditions set out in your F-1 visa requirements. 
When entering the US:
1. Make sure to enter the US no more than 30 days before your program begins.
2. As soon as you arrive in the country, contact your designated school official (DSO).
3. When you arrive at your university, contact your DSO again before the start date listed on your I-20 form.
While studying in the US:
1. Attend all your classes and maintain good academic standing. 
2. If you need extra time to complete your program which would exceed the end date specified in your I-20, speak with your DSO to discuss your options for possible extensions.
1. Make sure to enroll for a full course of study when your academic term is in session.
2. If you want to drop a class or change classes, make sure to speak to your DSO first.
If you want to take a break and/or go on vacation, remember to first complete at least one full academic year at your institution.  After your holiday, you must also register for classes in the next academic term.
Can F-1 International Students Work in the US? 
Yes, you will be able to work in the US on a F-1 student visa. However, you will have to follow certain F-1 visa rules and restrictions:
1. You can only work part time on campus while your academic term is in session
2. You can only work a maximum of 20 hours per week
3. You may be able to work off campus with the approval of your university
During academic breaks, you will be permitted to work full time, if your university allows it. You can learn more about working as a F-1 international student by referring to USCIS.gov.
When searching for work while you study, make sure to seek approval from your DSO first. 
Keep in mind, once you finish your program, you will have a grace period of 60 days to leave the US. If you wish to extend your stay, you can explore your options, such as transferring to another school or pursuing further education. 

